Homework 8

Theme: Input-Output

Question with * should be submitted but will not be graded. All the remaining questions carry equal weight. Please give justification for the results (i.e., you must show the necessary calculation process and/or the corresponding diagrams; otherwise, no credits). Submit a PDF file to Canvas.

1. Give at least one practical example each of when you will use Programmed I/O, Interrupt-Driven I/O, and DMA?  Justify your answer as to why you would not use the other two techniques in each case. 

2. What are the relative merits and demerits of memory-mapped I/O and isolated I/O? 

3. A DMA module is transferring characters to memory using cycle stealing, from a device transmitting at 12,400 bps. The processor is fetching instructions at the rate of 5 million instructions per second (MIPS). By how much will the processor be slowed down due to the DMA activity? Assume that each character uses 8 bits and bus transfers are one byte wide.

4. A computer consists of a processor and an I/O device D connected to main memory M via a shared bus with a data bus width of one word.  The processor can execute a maximum of 4 MIPS.  An average instruction requires 4 machine cycles, 2 of which use the memory bus.  A memory read/write operation uses 1 machine cycle. Suppose that the processor is continuously executing “background” programs that require 95% of the instruction rate but not any I/O instructions.  Assume that one processor cycle equals one bus cycle.  Now suppose the I/O device is used to transfer very large amounts of data between M and D. 

If programmed I/O is used and each one word transfer requires the processor to execute 4 instructions, estimate the max I/O data transfer rate in words/sec possible through D.
Estimate the same rate if DMA is used.
5. When a device sends an interrupt request to the CPU, discuss different ways the processor can determine which device issued the interrupt.  When a DMA module takes control of the bus, and while it retains control of the bus, what does the processor do? 